---
layout: post
title:  "What I've Been Reading"
date:   2019-05-03 09:57:13 +0100
categories: reading
---

- Ruth Millikan: *Varieties of Meaning*

I've read this work to fill another gap in my philosophical education. Millikan cured me from my rather superificial understanding of teleo-semantics. I still do not want to pass a judgement.


- Boethius: *The Consolation of Philosophy*

I have a long-standing affinity to the vision of reason and reality in the neo-platonist tradition, which I see as informing Hegel's work. From a philosophical perspective, I can see that many arguments are lacking, those concerning free will appearing the most sophisticated to me. Who defends Boethius' perspective of perpetrators as being harmed more than their victims today?

- Natsume Sōseki: *Sanshirō*

*Sanshirō* pleased me with the exactly right combination of a character I can identify with and a context that is distinctly foreign to me. The struggle between the Western influence and Japanese self-assertion appears productive, a source of creativity and progress. 

- Daisy Johnson: *Fen*

I purchased my copy of this book at a reading by Daisy Johnson at the Cambridge Literary Festival. At the risk of feeding into a problematic authenticity imagery, let me assert that she is a true author. Daisy Johnson's writing makes me uncomfortable, but my response might have no bearing on its literary quality.


- Ovid: *Metamorphoses*

I've read the Loeb Classical Library edition, which might not offer the most engaging translation, but allows me to occasionally glance at the Latin text. Having not read any passges of this work in years, the frequency of rape shocked me. However, rape plays a similar role as daughters killing their father, giving it the appearance of a heinous crime rather than a normal event.


- Zora Neale Hurston: *Their Eyes Were Watching God*

I was motivated to read this book by a line in a track by my favouriate rapper Milo: "You're a white supremacist if you wonder what country Obama was birthed in and went all through high school never reading Zora Neale Hurston". A defiant book on love and I adored the language.


- Gualtierio Piccinini: *Physical Computation*

Piccinini's book shows dedication to understanding computation in the physical world beyond anything else I have found. I just wish he was a better writer, as his prose can be tedious.
